docs/part-4.adoc, before:

= Part 4. Developing the checkout view
:experimental:
:icons: font
:idprefix:
:idseparator: -
:imagesdir: part-4
:nbsp:
:sectanchors:
:sectlinks:
:sectnums:
:source-highlighter: prettify
:toc:

== Generating CheckoutComponent and configuring routing

We want to generate the UI for the checkout view that will contain a form with billing and payment information. Clicking on the button PLACE ORDER will just print the form data on the browser's console. 

.Checkout form
image::fig_01.png[Checkout form,1034,role="thumb"]


. Generate the component to represent the checkout page:
+
[source, shell]
----
ng g c checkout --spec false
----

. Create _index.ts_ file inside the _src/app/checkout_ directory with the following content:
+
[source, ts]
----
export * from './checkout.component';
----

. In _src/app/app.routing.ts_ file add import statements for `CheckoutComponent` class,
add one more path configuration for the checkout page:
+
[source, ts]
----
import { CheckoutComponent } from './checkout';

export const routes: Route[] = [
  // Rest of the routing configuration...
  { path: 'checkout', component: CheckoutComponent },
];
----

== Implementing CheckoutComponent

. Replace content of the _src/app/checkout/checkout.component.ts_ file with the following content:
+
[source, ts]
----
import { Component } from '@angular/core';
import { FormBuilder, FormGroup, Validators } from '@angular/forms';

@Component({
  selector: 'ngs-checkout',
  styleUrls: [ './checkout.component.scss' ],
  templateUrl: './checkout.component.html'
})
export class CheckoutComponent {

  readonly months: string[] = [  // used in CC month dropdown
    'Jan', 'Feb', 'Mar', 'Apr', 'May', 'Jun',
    'Jul', 'Aug', 'Sep', 'Oct', 'Nov', 'Dec'
  ];

  readonly years: number[];  // used in CC year dropdown

  readonly formModel: FormGroup;

  constructor(fb: FormBuilder) {
    const currentYear = new Date().getFullYear();
    this.years = Array.from({length: 10}, (_, index) => currentYear + index);

    this.formModel = fb.group({
      account: fb.group({
        email: [, [Validators.required, Validators.email]],
        phone: [, Validators.required]
      }),
      address: fb.group({
        line1  : [, Validators.required],
        city   : [, Validators.required],
        state  : [, Validators.required],
        zip    : [, Validators.required],
        country: [, Validators.required]
      }),
      payment: fb.group({
        cardholder: [, Validators.required],
        cardNumber: [, Validators.required],
        expiry: fb.group({
          month: [, Validators.required],
          year : [, Validators.required],
          cvv  : [, Validators.required]
        })
      })
    });
  }

  // A helper function used in the template to display errors
  hasError(errorCode: string, path: string[]) {
    return this.formModel.get(path).touched
        && this.formModel.hasError(errorCode, path);
  }

  placeOrder() {
    console.log(this.formModel.value);
  }
}
----

. Replace content of _src/app/checkout/checkout.component.html_ with the following:
+
[source, html]
----
<header>
  <h1>Checkout</h1>
  <span>NgShop is a demo application - the payment method data are neither stored nor processed</span>
</header>

<form novalidate
      class="grid"
      [formGroup]="formModel"
      (ngSubmit)="placeOrder()">
  <section>
    <div formGroupName="account">
      <h2>Account Information</h2>

      <div class="row">
        <md-input-container>
          <input mdInput
                 required
                 autofocus
                 type="email"
                 placeholder="Email"
                 formControlName="email">
          <md-hint class="error" *ngIf="hasError('required', ['account', 'email'])">Email is required</md-hint>
          <md-hint class="error" *ngIf="hasError('pattern', ['account', 'email'])">Email is invalid</md-hint>
        </md-input-container>
      </div>

      <div class="row">
        <md-input-container>
          <input mdInput
                 required
                 type="tel"
                 placeholder="Phone Number"
                 formControlName="phone">
          <md-hint class="error" *ngIf="hasError('required', ['account', 'phone'])">Phone is required</md-hint>
        </md-input-container>
      </div>
    </div>

    <div formGroupName="address">
      <h2>Shipping Address</h2>

      <div class="row">
        <md-input-container>
          <input mdInput
                 required
                 type="text"
                 placeholder="Address"
                 formControlName="line1">
          <md-hint class="error" *ngIf="hasError('required', ['address', 'line1'])">Address is required</md-hint>
        </md-input-container>
      </div>

      <div class="row">
        <md-input-container>
          <input mdInput
                 required
                 type="text"
                 placeholder="City"
                 formControlName="city">
          <md-hint class="error" *ngIf="hasError('required', ['address', 'city'])">City is required</md-hint>
        </md-input-container>
      </div>

      <div class="row">
        <md-input-container>
          <input mdInput
                 required
                 type="text"
                 placeholder="State/Province"
                 formControlName="state">
          <md-hint class="error" *ngIf="hasError('required', ['address', 'state'])">State is required</md-hint>
        </md-input-container>

        <md-input-container [dividerColor]="hasError('required', ['address', 'zip']) ? 'warn': 'default'">
          <input mdInput
                 required
                 type="tel"
                 name="shipZip"
                 placeholder="Zip/Postal Code"
                 formControlName="zip">
          <md-hint class="error" *ngIf="hasError('required', ['address', 'zip'])">Zip code is required</md-hint>
        </md-input-container>
      </div>

      <div class="row">
        <md-select required
                   placeholder="Country"
                   formControlName="country">
          <md-option value="US">United States</md-option>
          <md-option value="CA">Canada</md-option>
        </md-select>
      </div>
    </div>
  </section>

  <section>
    <div formGroupName="payment">
      <h2>Payment Method</h2>

      <div class="row">
        <md-input-container>
          <input mdInput
                 required
                 type="text"
                 placeholder="Cardholder Name"
                 formControlName="cardholder">
          <md-hint class="error" *ngIf="hasError('required', ['payment', 'cardholder'])">Cardholder name is required</md-hint>
        </md-input-container>
      </div>

      <div class="row">
        <md-input-container>
          <input mdInput
                 required
                 type="tel"
                 placeholder="Card Number"
                 formControlName="cardNumber">
          <md-hint class="error" *ngIf="hasError('required', ['payment', 'cardNumber'])">Card number is required</md-hint>
        </md-input-container>
      </div>

      <div class="row expiry" formGroupName="expiry">
        <div>
          <label>Expiry</label>
          <md-select formControlName="month">
            <md-option *ngFor="let m of months" [value]="m">{{ m }}</md-option>
          </md-select>
        </div>

        <md-select formControlName="year">
          <md-option *ngFor="let y of years" [value]="y">{{ y }}</md-option>
        </md-select>

        <md-input-container floatingPlaceholder="false">
          <input mdInput
                 required
                 type="tel"
                 formControlName="cvv"
                 placeholder="CVV">
        </md-input-container>
      </div>
    </div>

    <h2>Order Summary</h2>

    <div class="row">
      <button md-raised-button
              color="primary"
              type="submit">PLACE ORDER</button>
    </div>
  </section>
</form>
----
+
*TIP:* If you want the PLACE ORDER button to be disabled if the form is not valid,  add `[disabled]=formModel.invalid` to the button.

. Add the following content to _src/app/checkout/checkout.component.scss_:
+
[source, scss]
----
@import '../../styles/palette';

:host {
  display: block;
  padding: 64px 24px 24px;
}

header {
  text-align: center;
  h1 {
    font-size: 20px;
    font-weight: 500;
    margin: 0 0 4px 0;
  }
  span {
    font-size: 12px;
    color: mat-color($ngs-foreground, secondary-text);
  }
}

md-input-container, md-select {
  font-size: 16px;

  &.error {
    color: mat-color($ngs-warn) !important;
  }
}

md-hint.error {
  color: mat-color($ngs-warn);
}

.grid {
  margin: 48px auto 0;
  max-width: 900px;
  display: flex;

  section {
    flex: 1;

    &:not(:first-child) {
      margin-left: 80px;
    }
  }

  h2 {
    font-size: 13px;
    font-weight: 700;
    margin: 8px 0;
  }

  .row {
    height: 72px;
    display: flex;
    align-items: center;

    & > * {
      flex: 1;
    }

    & > *:not(:first-child) {
      margin-left: 8px;
    }
  }

  .row.expiry {
    position: relative;

    label {
      color: mat-color($ngs-foreground, hint-text);
      font-size: 12px;
      position: absolute;
      left: 0;
      top: 8px;
    }
  }
}
----

. Run the app with the `ng serve -o` command and enter `http://localhost:4200/checkout` in the browser. You should see the following checkout form:
+
.Checkout form
image::fig_01.png[Checkout form,1034,role="thumb"]

. Enter some values in the form and click on the PLACE ORDER button. The browser will print the content of the form model on the console.

. Finally, we need to add a link to the checkout form in the shopping cart. In _src/app/cart/cart.component.html_ add `routerLink` directive to the checkout button so it'll look like this:
+
[source, html]
----
<a md-raised-button routerLink="/checkout">CHECKOUT</a>
----

. Run the app and add some products to the shopping cart. Click on the shopping cart icon. In the shopping cart view, click on the CHECKOUT button and it'll render the checkput view.

. Commit the changes to save the progress:
+
[source, shell]
----
git add -A && git commit -m "Add checkout page"
----

*_This concludes the workshop. Enjoy your shopping at NgShop!_*

*_Send your training inquiries to training@faratasystems.com_*

Commit message:

added instructions for Tomcat deployment

docs/part-4.adoc, after:

= Part 4. Developing the checkout view
:experimental:
:icons: font
:idprefix:
:idseparator: -
:imagesdir: part-4
:nbsp:
:sectanchors:
:sectlinks:
:sectnums:
:source-highlighter: prettify
:toc:

== Generating CheckoutComponent and configuring routing

We want to generate the UI for the checkout view that will contain a form with billing and payment information. Clicking on the button PLACE ORDER will just print the form data on the browser's console. 

.Checkout form
image::fig_01.png[Checkout form,1034,role="thumb"]


. Generate the component to represent the checkout page:
+
[source, shell]
----
ng g c checkout --spec false
----

. Create _index.ts_ file inside the _src/app/checkout_ directory with the following content:
+
[source, ts]
----
export * from './checkout.component';
----

. In _src/app/app.routing.ts_ file add import statements for `CheckoutComponent` class,
add one more path configuration for the checkout page:
+
[source, ts]
----
import { CheckoutComponent } from './checkout';

export const routes: Route[] = [
  // Rest of the routing configuration...
  { path: 'checkout', component: CheckoutComponent },
];
----

== Implementing CheckoutComponent

. Replace content of the _src/app/checkout/checkout.component.ts_ file with the following content:
+
[source, ts]
----
import { Component } from '@angular/core';
import { FormBuilder, FormGroup, Validators } from '@angular/forms';

@Component({
  selector: 'ngs-checkout',
  styleUrls: [ './checkout.component.scss' ],
  templateUrl: './checkout.component.html'
})
export class CheckoutComponent {

  readonly months: string[] = [  // used in CC month dropdown
    'Jan', 'Feb', 'Mar', 'Apr', 'May', 'Jun',
    'Jul', 'Aug', 'Sep', 'Oct', 'Nov', 'Dec'
  ];

  readonly years: number[];  // used in CC year dropdown

  readonly formModel: FormGroup;

  constructor(fb: FormBuilder) {
    const currentYear = new Date().getFullYear();
    this.years = Array.from({length: 10}, (_, index) => currentYear + index);

    this.formModel = fb.group({
      account: fb.group({
        email: [, [Validators.required, Validators.email]],
        phone: [, Validators.required]
      }),
      address: fb.group({
        line1  : [, Validators.required],
        city   : [, Validators.required],
        state  : [, Validators.required],
        zip    : [, Validators.required],
        country: [, Validators.required]
      }),
      payment: fb.group({
        cardholder: [, Validators.required],
        cardNumber: [, Validators.required],
        expiry: fb.group({
          month: [, Validators.required],
          year : [, Validators.required],
          cvv  : [, Validators.required]
        })
      })
    });
  }

  // A helper function used in the template to display errors
  hasError(errorCode: string, path: string[]) {
    return this.formModel.get(path).touched
        && this.formModel.hasError(errorCode, path);
  }

  placeOrder() {
    console.log(this.formModel.value);
  }
}
----

. Replace content of _src/app/checkout/checkout.component.html_ with the following:
+
[source, html]
----
<header>
  <h1>Checkout</h1>
  <span>NgShop is a demo application - the payment method data are neither stored nor processed</span>
</header>

<form novalidate
      class="grid"
      [formGroup]="formModel"
      (ngSubmit)="placeOrder()">
  <section>
    <div formGroupName="account">
      <h2>Account Information</h2>

      <div class="row">
        <md-input-container>
          <input mdInput
                 required
                 autofocus
                 type="email"
                 placeholder="Email"
                 formControlName="email">
          <md-hint class="error" *ngIf="hasError('required', ['account', 'email'])">Email is required</md-hint>
          <md-hint class="error" *ngIf="hasError('pattern', ['account', 'email'])">Email is invalid</md-hint>
        </md-input-container>
      </div>

      <div class="row">
        <md-input-container>
          <input mdInput
                 required
                 type="tel"
                 placeholder="Phone Number"
                 formControlName="phone">
          <md-hint class="error" *ngIf="hasError('required', ['account', 'phone'])">Phone is required</md-hint>
        </md-input-container>
      </div>
    </div>

    <div formGroupName="address">
      <h2>Shipping Address</h2>

      <div class="row">
        <md-input-container>
          <input mdInput
                 required
                 type="text"
                 placeholder="Address"
                 formControlName="line1">
          <md-hint class="error" *ngIf="hasError('required', ['address', 'line1'])">Address is required</md-hint>
        </md-input-container>
      </div>

      <div class="row">
        <md-input-container>
          <input mdInput
                 required
                 type="text"
                 placeholder="City"
                 formControlName="city">
          <md-hint class="error" *ngIf="hasError('required', ['address', 'city'])">City is required</md-hint>
        </md-input-container>
      </div>

      <div class="row">
        <md-input-container>
          <input mdInput
                 required
                 type="text"
                 placeholder="State/Province"
                 formControlName="state">
          <md-hint class="error" *ngIf="hasError('required', ['address', 'state'])">State is required</md-hint>
        </md-input-container>

        <md-input-container [dividerColor]="hasError('required', ['address', 'zip']) ? 'warn': 'default'">
          <input mdInput
                 required
                 type="tel"
                 name="shipZip"
                 placeholder="Zip/Postal Code"
                 formControlName="zip">
          <md-hint class="error" *ngIf="hasError('required', ['address', 'zip'])">Zip code is required</md-hint>
        </md-input-container>
      </div>

      <div class="row">
        <md-select required
                   placeholder="Country"
                   formControlName="country">
          <md-option value="US">United States</md-option>
          <md-option value="CA">Canada</md-option>
        </md-select>
      </div>
    </div>
  </section>

  <section>
    <div formGroupName="payment">
      <h2>Payment Method</h2>

      <div class="row">
        <md-input-container>
          <input mdInput
                 required
                 type="text"
                 placeholder="Cardholder Name"
                 formControlName="cardholder">
          <md-hint class="error" *ngIf="hasError('required', ['payment', 'cardholder'])">Cardholder name is required</md-hint>
        </md-input-container>
      </div>

      <div class="row">
        <md-input-container>
          <input mdInput
                 required
                 type="tel"
                 placeholder="Card Number"
                 formControlName="cardNumber">
          <md-hint class="error" *ngIf="hasError('required', ['payment', 'cardNumber'])">Card number is required</md-hint>
        </md-input-container>
      </div>

      <div class="row expiry" formGroupName="expiry">
        <div>
          <label>Expiry</label>
          <md-select formControlName="month">
            <md-option *ngFor="let m of months" [value]="m">{{ m }}</md-option>
          </md-select>
        </div>

        <md-select formControlName="year">
          <md-option *ngFor="let y of years" [value]="y">{{ y }}</md-option>
        </md-select>

        <md-input-container floatingPlaceholder="false">
          <input mdInput
                 required
                 type="tel"
                 formControlName="cvv"
                 placeholder="CVV">
        </md-input-container>
      </div>
    </div>

    <h2>Order Summary</h2>

    <div class="row">
      <button md-raised-button
              color="primary"
              type="submit">PLACE ORDER</button>
    </div>
  </section>
</form>
----
+
*TIP:* If you want the PLACE ORDER button to be disabled if the form is not valid,  add `[disabled]=formModel.invalid` to the button.

. Add the following content to _src/app/checkout/checkout.component.scss_:
+
[source, scss]
----
@import '../../styles/palette';

:host {
  display: block;
  padding: 64px 24px 24px;
}

header {
  text-align: center;
  h1 {
    font-size: 20px;
    font-weight: 500;
    margin: 0 0 4px 0;
  }
  span {
    font-size: 12px;
    color: mat-color($ngs-foreground, secondary-text);
  }
}

md-input-container, md-select {
  font-size: 16px;

  &.error {
    color: mat-color($ngs-warn) !important;
  }
}

md-hint.error {
  color: mat-color($ngs-warn);
}

.grid {
  margin: 48px auto 0;
  max-width: 900px;
  display: flex;

  section {
    flex: 1;

    &:not(:first-child) {
      margin-left: 80px;
    }
  }

  h2 {
    font-size: 13px;
    font-weight: 700;
    margin: 8px 0;
  }

  .row {
    height: 72px;
    display: flex;
    align-items: center;

    & > * {
      flex: 1;
    }

    & > *:not(:first-child) {
      margin-left: 8px;
    }
  }

  .row.expiry {
    position: relative;

    label {
      color: mat-color($ngs-foreground, hint-text);
      font-size: 12px;
      position: absolute;
      left: 0;
      top: 8px;
    }
  }
}
----

. Run the app with the `ng serve -o` command and enter `http://localhost:4200/checkout` in the browser. You should see the following checkout form:
+
.Checkout form
image::fig_01.png[Checkout form,1034,role="thumb"]

. Enter some values in the form and click on the PLACE ORDER button. The browser will print the content of the form model on the console.

. Finally, we need to add a link to the checkout form in the shopping cart. In _src/app/cart/cart.component.html_ add `routerLink` directive to the checkout button so it'll look like this:
+
[source, html]
----
<a md-raised-button routerLink="/checkout">CHECKOUT</a>
----

. Run the app and add some products to the shopping cart. Click on the shopping cart icon. In the shopping cart view, click on the CHECKOUT button and it'll render the checkput view.

. Commit the changes to save the progress:
+
[source, shell]
----
git add -A && git commit -m "Add checkout page"
----

. To build the bundles from deployment, run `ng build -prod` and deploy them under the Web server of your choice.

.Deploying an Angular app under the Java Tomcat server
******************
1. Build the bundles specifying the current directory as the base of your app (note the period at the end):
+
[source, sh]
----
ng build -prod --base-href .
----
+
This will build the bundles into the dist directory of your project. 

2. Copy the dist directory of your Angular project to the webapps/ROOT dir of your Tomcat installation directory.

3. Start Tomcat and open the following URL in your browser: http://localhost:8080/dist
******************

*_This concludes the workshop. Enjoy your shopping at NgShop!_*

*_Send your training inquiries to training@faratasystems.com_*
